README.md, before:

# Optional

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/markphelps/optional.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/markphelps/optional)
[![Release](https://img.shields.io/github/release/markphelps/optional.svg?style=flat-square)](https://github.com/markphelps/optional/releases/latest)
[![Software License](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-MIT-brightgreen.svg?style=flat-square)](LICENSE.md)
[![Go Doc](https://img.shields.io/badge/godoc-reference-blue.svg?style=flat-square)](http://godoc.org/github.com/markphelps/optional)
[![Go Report Card](https://goreportcard.com/badge/github.com/markphelps/optional?style=flat-square)](https://goreportcard.com/report/github.com/markphelps/optional)
[![SayThanks.io](https://img.shields.io/badge/SayThanks.io-%E2%98%BC-1EAEDB.svg?style=flat-square)](https://saythanks.io/to/markphelps)

Optional is a tool that generates option type wrappers around a given type T.

It is also a library that provides option types for the primitive Go types.

## Motivation

In Go, variables declared without an explicit initial value are given their zero value. Most of the time this is what you want, but sometimes you want to be able to tell if a variable was set or if it's just a zero value. That's where [option types](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Option_type) come in handy.

## Marshalling/Unmarshalling JSON

**Note:** v0.6.0 introduces a potential breaking change to anyone depending on marshalling non-present values to their zero values instead of null. See: [#9](https://github.com/markphelps/optional/pull/9) for more context.

Option types also marshal to/from JSON as you would expect:

### Marshalling

```go
package main

import (
	"encoding/json"
	"fmt"
)

func main() {
	var value = struct {
		Field optional.String `json:"field,omitempty"`
	}{
		Field: optional.NewString("bar"),
	}

	out, _ := json.Marshal(value)

	fmt.Println(string(out))
	// outputs: {"field":"bar"}
}
```

### Unmarshalling

```go
package main

import (
	"encoding/json"
	"fmt"
)

func main() {
	var value = &struct {
		Field optional.String `json:"field,omitempty"`
	}{}

	_ = json.Unmarshal([]byte(`{"field":"bar"}`), value)

	value.Field.If(func(s string) {
		fmt.Println(s)
	})
	// outputs: bar
}
```

See [example_test.go](example_test.go) for more examples.

## Inspiration

* Java [Optional](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/util/Optional.html)
* [https://github.com/leighmcculloch/go-optional](https://github.com/leighmcculloch/go-optional)
* [https://github.com/golang/go/issues/7054](https://github.com/golang/go/issues/7054)

## Tool

### Install

`go get -u github.com/markphelps/optional/cmd/optional`

### Usage

Typically this process would be run using go generate, like this:

```go
//go:generate optional -type=Foo
```

running this command:

```bash
optional -type=Foo
```

in the same directory will create the file optional_foo.go
containing a definition of:

```go
type OptionalFoo struct {
  ...
}
```

The default type is OptionalT or optionalT (depending on if the type is exported)
and output file is optional_t.go. This can be overridden with the -output flag.

## Library

* [bool](bool.go)
* [byte](byte.go)
* [complex128](complex128.go)
* [complex64](complex64.go)
* [float32](float32.go)
* [float64](float64.go)
* [int](int.go)
* [int16](int16.go)
* [int32](int32.go)
* [int64](int64.go)
* [int8](int8.go)
* [rune](rune.go)
* [string](string.go)
* [uint](uint.go)
* [uint16](uint16.go)
* [uint32](uint32.go)
* [uint64](uint64.go)
* [uint8](uint8.go)
* [uintptr](uintptr.go)
* [error](error.go)

### Usage

```go
package main

import (
	"fmt"

	"github.com/markphelps/optional"
)

func main() {
	s := optional.NewString("foo")

	value, err := s.Get()
	if err != nil {
		// handle error!
	} else {
		fmt.Println(value)
	}

	t := optional.String{}
	fmt.Println(t.OrElse("bar"))
}
```

See [example_test.go](example_test.go) and the [documentation](http://godoc.org/github.com/markphelps/optional) for more usage.

## Contributing

1. [Fork it](https://github.com/markphelps/optional/fork)
1. Create your feature branch (`git checkout -b my-new-feature`)
1. Commit your changes (`git commit -am 'Add some feature'`)
1. Push to the branch (`git push origin my-new-feature`)
1. Create a new Pull Request

### Golden Files

If changing the API you may need to update the [golden files](https://medium.com/soon-london/testing-with-golden-files-in-go-7fccc71c43d3) for your tests to pass by running `go test ./cmd/optional/... -update`.

Commit message:

Add section on test coverage and cleanup README

README.md, after:

# Optional

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/markphelps/optional.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/markphelps/optional)
[![Release](https://img.shields.io/github/release/markphelps/optional.svg?style=flat-square)](https://github.com/markphelps/optional/releases/latest)
[![Software License](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-MIT-brightgreen.svg?style=flat-square)](LICENSE.md)
[![Go Doc](https://img.shields.io/badge/godoc-reference-blue.svg?style=flat-square)](http://godoc.org/github.com/markphelps/optional)
[![Go Report Card](https://goreportcard.com/badge/github.com/markphelps/optional?style=flat-square)](https://goreportcard.com/report/github.com/markphelps/optional)
[![SayThanks.io](https://img.shields.io/badge/SayThanks.io-%E2%98%BC-1EAEDB.svg?style=flat-square)](https://saythanks.io/to/markphelps)

Optional is a library that provides option types for the primitive Go types.

It can also be used as a tool to generate option type wrappers around your own types.

## Motivation

In Go, variables declared without an explicit initial value are given their zero value. Most of the time this is what you want, but sometimes you want to be able to tell if a variable was set or if it's just a zero value. That's where [option types](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Option_type) come in handy.

## Marshalling/Unmarshalling JSON

**Note:** v0.6.0 introduces a potential breaking change to anyone depending on marshalling non-present values to their zero values instead of null. See: [#9](https://github.com/markphelps/optional/pull/9) for more context.

Option types marshal to/from JSON as you would expect:

### Marshalling

```go
package main

import (
	"encoding/json"
	"fmt"
)

func main() {
	var value = struct {
		Field optional.String `json:"field,omitempty"`
	}{
		Field: optional.NewString("bar"),
	}

	out, _ := json.Marshal(value)

	fmt.Println(string(out))
	// outputs: {"field":"bar"}
}
```

### Unmarshalling

```go
package main

import (
	"encoding/json"
	"fmt"
)

func main() {
	var value = &struct {
		Field optional.String `json:"field,omitempty"`
	}{}

	_ = json.Unmarshal([]byte(`{"field":"bar"}`), value)

	value.Field.If(func(s string) {
		fmt.Println(s)
	})
	// outputs: bar
}
```

See [example_test.go](example_test.go) for more examples.

## Inspiration

* Java [Optional](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/util/Optional.html)
* [https://github.com/leighmcculloch/go-optional](https://github.com/leighmcculloch/go-optional)
* [https://github.com/golang/go/issues/7054](https://github.com/golang/go/issues/7054)

## Tool

### Install

`go get -u github.com/markphelps/optional/cmd/optional`

### Usage

Typically this process would be run using go generate, like this:

```go
//go:generate optional -type=Foo
```

running this command:

```bash
optional -type=Foo
```

in the same directory will create the file optional_foo.go
containing a definition of:

```go
type OptionalFoo struct {
  ...
}
```

The default type is OptionalT or optionalT (depending on if the type is exported)
and output file is optional_t.go. This can be overridden with the -output flag.

## Library

* [bool](bool.go)
* [byte](byte.go)
* [complex128](complex128.go)
* [complex64](complex64.go)
* [float32](float32.go)
* [float64](float64.go)
* [int](int.go)
* [int16](int16.go)
* [int32](int32.go)
* [int64](int64.go)
* [int8](int8.go)
* [rune](rune.go)
* [string](string.go)
* [uint](uint.go)
* [uint16](uint16.go)
* [uint32](uint32.go)
* [uint64](uint64.go)
* [uint8](uint8.go)
* [uintptr](uintptr.go)
* [error](error.go)

### Usage

```go
package main

import (
	"fmt"

	"github.com/markphelps/optional"
)

func main() {
	s := optional.NewString("foo")

	value, err := s.Get()
	if err != nil {
		// handle error!
	} else {
		fmt.Println(value)
	}

	t := optional.String{}
	fmt.Println(t.OrElse("bar"))
}
```

See [example_test.go](example_test.go) and the [documentation](http://godoc.org/github.com/markphelps/optional) for more usage.

## Test Coverage

As you can see test coverage is a bit lacking for the library. This is simply because testing generated code is not super easy. I'm currently working on improving test coverage for the generated types, but in the meantime checkout [string_test.go](string_test.go) and [int_test.go](int_test.go) for examples.

Also checkout:

* [example_test.go](example_test.go) for example usage.
* [cmd/optional/golden_test.go](cmd/optional/golden_test.go) for [golden file](https://medium.com/soon-london/testing-with-golden-files-in-go-7fccc71c43d3) based testing of the generator itself.

## Contributing

1. [Fork it](https://github.com/markphelps/optional/fork)
1. Create your feature branch (`git checkout -b my-new-feature`)
1. Commit your changes (`git commit -am 'Add some feature'`)
1. Push to the branch (`git push origin my-new-feature`)
1. Create a new Pull Request

### Golden Files

If changing the API you may need to update the [golden files](https://medium.com/soon-london/testing-with-golden-files-in-go-7fccc71c43d3) for your tests to pass by running:

`go test ./cmd/optional/... -update`.
